Skip to main content
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › UK › society law scotland wales northern ireland education media
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
NHS
Mother of dead teenager gets abusive message 'from NHS trust worker'
Woman claiming to work for Southern Health NHS trust calls Dr Sara Ryan ‘vindictive cow’ after report on son’s death

Play Video
‘NHS trust worker’’s abusive message to mother of dead teenager – audio
Haroon Siddique
Wednesday 4 May 2016 11.41 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
387
Save for later
The mother of a teenager who died while under the care of a heavily criticised mental health trust has been called a “vindictive cow” in a voicemail message left by someone claiming to work for the trust.
Dr Sara Ryan has been campaigning for accountability from Southern Health NHS foundation trust and its staff since her 18-year-old son Connor Sparrowhawk drowned in a bath at Slade House in Oxfordshire in July 2013, after an epileptic seizure.
Connor, nicknamed laughing boy or LB, had learning difficulties.
Neglect contributed to teenager's death at NHS unit, inquest finds
Read more
In December last year, an independent report commissioned by NHS England at the request of Connor’s family reported that the trust had failed to properly investigate the deaths of more than 1,000 patients with learning disabilities or mental health problems over a four-year period, criticising a “failure of leadership”.
On Friday the NHS regulator, the Care Quality Commission (CQC), said the trust was still not doing enough to protect people in its care.
Just after 9.30am on the same day, Ryan received the abusive message from a female caller, a recording of which was posted on the Justice for LB website.
The woman said: “I’ve been seeing on the media about your son, your poor son that died in the care of Southern Health. I work for Southern Health and it’s awful that you lost him, I’m so sorry that you have done, it’s tragic, and I hope you find some closure after the report, the issue of the … CQC report today. But I do think you are being very vindictive. I think you are a vindictive cow, on TV all the time slating the NHS, Southern Health.”
On her blog, Ryan wrote: “The call is vitriolic, nasty and beyond inappropriate. But it’s simply part of a set of improbably inappropriate, nasty and worse responses we’ve endured since LB died, evidence of a system in which defensiveness, bullying and family-crushing flourishes.”
A Southern Health spokesman said it was taking the matter seriously and planned to investigate the call. “We have been made aware of the phone message through social media, and the content is deeply concerning,” he said. “The trust cannot condone such behaviour and we take matters like this extremely seriously.
“We urge anyone with any information to get in contact with us so a full internal investigation can take place.”
A spokeswoman for Thames Valley Police confirmed that it had launched an investigation into the voicemail message.
She said: “Earlier today as a result of a pre-planned meeting with Dr Ryan, TVP was made aware of a malicious telephone message made to her on April 29. This has now been recorded as a report of a malicious communication and is currently under investigation.”
Southern Health’s chairman, Mike Petter, resigned on Thursday before the critical report, saying he was doing so “to allow new board leadership to take forward the improvements”.
On Tuesday, in the House of Commons, the shadow mental health minister, Luciana Berger, called for the trust’s chief executive, Katrina Percy, to be sacked. She said very little had been done to improve the trust’s performance.
In response, the health minister Alistair Burt said the CQC report made for “disturbing reading” and the government had not ruled out the possibility of an inquiry.
In October last year, a jury delivered a damning verdict, that serious failings and neglect had contributed to Connor’s death.
More news
Topics
NHS Mental health Health
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
more on this story
Southern Health chairman quits after damning report by inspectors
5d
Autistic people are more likely to die early. Research is needed to find out why
5 Apr 2016
People with learning disabilities are still not recognised as fully human
Sara Ryan
1 Mar 2016
44
‘We never thought he wouldn’t come home’: why did our son, Connor Sparrowhawk, die?

2 Apr 2016
Jeremy Hunt criticises NHS trust over response to unexpected deaths
17 Dec 2015
NHS trust 'failed to properly investigate deaths of more than 1,000 patients'
9 Dec 2015
Neglect contributed to teenager's death at NHS unit, inquest finds
16 Oct 2015
Mother shocked that epileptic son was left to bathe alone in NHS care unit
13 Oct 2015
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
world
sport
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
uk news
› society
› nhs
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  