Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
Advertisement
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › sport › cricket rugby union F1 tennis golf cycling boxing racing rugby league football
UK
world
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Chris Gayle
Chris Gayle could make Big Bash return despite ‘don’t blush baby’ remarks
• Melbourne Renegades open to possibility of re-signing West Indies batsman
• Gayle caused controversy with interview during last Twenty20 tournament
Chris Gayle during his controversial interview with Channel Ten reporter Mel McLaughlin during the Big Bash in Australia four months ago. Photograph: Channel Ten
Press Association
Wednesday 4 May 2016 12.30 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
4
Save for later
Chris Gayle may yet return to the Big Bash next winter despite the furore he caused in a controversial broadcast interview during the latest edition of Australia’s Twenty20 tournament.
The West Indies batsman caused a stir in January when his response to a question from reporter Mel McLaughlin was to ask if she would like to have a drink with him before adding: “Don’t blush, baby.”
Chris Gayle controversy: sexist, not sexy – and certainly not funny
Marina Hyde
Read more
The unfavourable reaction from pundits cast a cloud over Gayle’s prospects of playing in the Big Bash again. But the door appears ajar after Melbourne Renegades coach David Saker said on Wednesday there is “still a chance” of Gayle returning.
Saker, speaking after Cricket Australia chief executive James Sutherland recently clarified that no BBL franchise would be prevented from signing Gayle, told Fairfax Media that factors such as the controversy over Gayle’s interview would not affect his judgment on whether to re-sign him. “That doesn’t enter my mind, I just pick a squad of players,” said the former England bowling coach. “If the hierarchies or people in higher positions than myself come down on that, they do. All I try to do is pick a squad to win.”
Reflecting on Gayle’s remarks four months ago, Saker added: “We know it was the wrong thing to do, and he probably identified that quite quickly. We all did. But I think what happened afterwards was a bit of a ‘beat-up’. We really want women in sport, and I think in Australia we’re embracing that quite well.
“Mel [McLaughlin] does a fantastic job with what she does. We know it was wrong, but a lot of people put their two bob’s worth in that probably didn’t need to.”
Gayle, who has been badly out of form since his brilliant World Twenty20 century against England in March and will play for Somerset in this summer’s NatWest Blast, has reportedly recently named his new-born daughter Blush.
More news
Topics
Chris Gayle Big Bash League Cricket Australia sport
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
promoted linksfrom around the webRecommended by Outbrain
About this Content
What A Million Dollars Can Buy You Around the World
MANSION GLOBAL BY DOW JONES
10 Most Awesome Places in The World
TOP 10
Top 10 Cheapest and Awesome Gadgets You Can Get in 2016
LOVE AND MIND
15 million players are already addicted!
FORGE OF EMPIRES
Top 10 Oldest Trees in the World in 2016 | Love and Mind
LOVE AND MIND
Where the World's Billionaires Live
MANSION GLOBAL BY DOW JONES
Ikea's new chainless bike never rusts
FOX NEWS TECH
5 Words To Make Her Fall Madly In Love With You
COMOS ENTERTAINMENT UPDATES
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
sport
› chris gayle
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  