Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › sport › F1 tennis golf cycling boxing racing rugby league football cricket rugby union
UK
world
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Lewis Hamilton
Mercedes letter: we are not favouring Nico Rosberg over Lewis Hamilton
• ‘The guys and girls work for each other – there is no A or B team here’
• Toto Wolff said sabotage theories come from ‘lunatics lying in their beds’
The Mercedes team were in good heart after their one-two in the Russian grand prix, won by Nico Rosberg, left, with Lewis Hamilton second. Photograph: Tass/Barcroft Images
Press Association
Wednesday 4 May 2016 14.38 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
58
Save for later
Mercedes have written an open letter to reassure fans that they are not deliberately favouring Nico Rosberg over Lewis Hamilton.
Hamilton’s defence to his title has been fraught with a number of mechanical problems – most recently in Russia where he suffered engine troubles in both qualifying and the race. In contrast, his team-mate has cantered to four relatively trouble-free victories to establish a 43-point lead in the championship.
F1 race director: safety measures must be adopted despite driver opposition
Read more
Sceptics, largely on social media, have claimed that Mercedes, a German manufacturer, are clearing the path for Germany’s Rosberg to win the title. Some have also pointed to their decision to swap the mechanics around on their cars before the new season.
After Sunday’s race in Sochi, the Mercedes executive director Toto Wolff said the theories were made up by a “bunch of lunatics lying in their beds with their laptops on their chests”.
In a 1,100-word open letter published on Wednesday, Mercedes, winners of 36 of the last 42 races, felt compelled once more to quash any claims of favouritism within their team.
They wrote: “We have seen a lot of frustration aired online after the mechanical issues experienced in Sochi. We share those same emotions – but for us, it goes far beyond frustration.
“For those watching at home, a grand prix weekend starts on a Thursday morning and ends on Sunday night. A bad result might hurt for a few hours afterwards – but then life moves on.
“For more than 1,000 people at Brackley and Brixworth, however, this is our life. These men and women pour their blood, sweat and tears into racing, day in, day out – often working around the clock and spending weeks at a time away from loved ones. They do so through passion for their work, loyalty to their team-mates and a desire to be the best.
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Hamilton gets some close attention in the pits. Photograph: Srdjan Suki/AFP/Getty Images
“To paraphrase Mr Toto Wolff, we have worked our a**** off to get where we are today – and we have done so as a team.”
The letter continued: “They don’t just perform pit-stops together. They travel, share rooms, eat meals, construct garages, build cars, rebuild broken cars, kit spares and pack down tonnes of freight – together. They sweat, strain, laugh, cry, shout, scream, celebrate, and commiserate – together. And, as one of our own often says, they win and lose – together.
“We have the best guys and girls in the world, doing an awesome job, week in and week out – and they do it for the team. Not for one driver or the other – but for each other. There is no ‘A’ or ‘B’ team here.”
Mercedes chartered a private jet packed with replacement engine parts from their Brixworth base to ensure that Hamilton was not further penalised with a pit-lane start following his troubles in qualifying. The jet arrived in Sochi at 2am where Hamilton’s mechanics worked through the night to enable him to start from 10th.
Mercedes continued: “Through all of this, we stand united as a team – just as we always have. To those who stand with us, we thank you. And to the rest – the haters, the naysayers, the conspirators... if we can convince even half of you of what we really stand for, we’ll consider that a battle well won.”
More news
Topics
Lewis Hamilton Mercedes GP Formula One 2016 Formula One Motor sport
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
football
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
sport
› lewis hamilton
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  