Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
Advertisement
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › opinion columnists
UK
world
sport
football
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Archaeology
Opinion
In resurrecting Captain Cook’s ship, we can re-examine our colonial past
Sarah Cefai
Rather than display James Cook’s ship in a traditional museum, why not entrust it to a First Nations co-operative?
A replica of the Endeavour arrives in Sydney harbour in 2012. Now the original ship has been discovered off Rhode Island. Photograph: The Sydney Morning Herald/Fairfax Media via Getty Images
Wednesday 4 May 2016 14.29 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
15
Comments
122
Save for later
N
ews has emerged confirming the whereabouts of the wreckage of HMS Endeavour, a ship sailed by Captain James Cook. Reports invariably contain images of the ship in its pomp, proudly reminding the reader of its British origins and its voyage to the Pacific Ocean, where Cook took possession of Australia. But where should Cook’s ship go? Once we dredge it up, or rather, once the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project dredges it up, where should it be put? And will Cook’s ship be allowed to take us beyond our colonial past?
It must be remembered that it is our cultural attachment that will be doing the dredging, our obsession and fascination with these objects that circulate as evidence of the all-powerful histories of empire. Where we decide to put Cook’s ship and its contents will shape where it takes us. Through its presentation we will relate to it culturally; as an object of desire or fascination for some, and boredom for others. We will tell a new story and it will make us feel something.
Many of the Anglo-American and Australian public are likely to feel awe in the presence of the Endeavour. As we stand before it, in whatever state it is in (probably not wrecked but reconstructed to its “original” form), it is unlikely to rouse anything like the grief that has ripped the souls of millions of Indigenous Australians. Especially if we preserve it, present it and interpret it as part of the British Museum’s set.
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Captain James Cook. Photograph: Dea Picture Library/De Agostini/Getty Images
This is not to say that the ship should become an opportunity for apology or sympathetic feeling. In Australia many Indigenous activists, public intellectuals and academics tell us that they aren’t interested in sympathy or other paternalistic emotions – an attitude that will be no surprise to those familiar with public forums such as the Guardian column IndigenousX.
Which should not be to dismiss the historical value of saying sorry, either. And it certainly isn’t to speak on behalf of Indigenous people – as if I ever could. It is merely to say that we are all looking forward as well as back, that life is moving on despite us, and we need to move things on too, in a way that changes the story. A story that until now has been that of “the famous British explorer”. A story that is in fact one of colonial rule, whiteness, and Indigenous sovereignty. A story in which we are all intertwined.
There is no such thing as “this side of the world”. The world isn’t made up of sides. Australia is very much “here” – Britons hear the accents, buy the products, watch the TV. And we are very much “there” – we fill the tourism ventures, go backpacking, populate their ABC with our BBC. We export our media. And in return Australia gave us The Conversation.
The resurrection of Cook’s ship is taking place here, in our shared world; the one without sides. This is why much academic literature refers to the colonial past as a “present”, to recognise how what is happening now continually remakes the effects of the past.
Colonial ruins are a fitting epitaph for the British empire
Chibundu Onuzo
Read more
Perhaps what should be most worrying is that the Rhode Island Marine Archaeology Project “is launching a campaign to finance the construction of a storage facility to accommodate the objects”. Is it so hard to imagine that the ship should be placed in the hands of a co-operative of First Nations organisations rather than stay with those that will pander to a whitewashed version of history? As ever, we entrust our history to scientists, sometimes governments and corporations, rather than to those who produce counter-narratives that could unsettle our place in the world.
How we choose to open up the Endeavour to modern interpretation will dictate how much opportunity there is for new stories to be told, for the familiar narratives of a heroic Captain Cook to be subverted by the imperialistic reality.
It is hard not be cynical about the possible resting place for this famous old ship. My girlfriend jokes about an auction on eBay. I have a vision of a jolly theme park, Cook’s vessel digitally mediated with fancy holograms, all the better to distract from the reality of the Endeavour’s colonial past.
More comment
Topics
Archaeology Rhode Island Indigenous Australians
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
promoted linksfrom around the webRecommended by Outbrain
About this Content
10 Most Awesome Places in The World
TOP 10
10 Shocking Facts About Stingy People That Will Surprise…
GIST MANIAC
Million Dollar Luxury Homes You Have to See to Believe
MANSION GLOBAL BY DOW JONES
10 Cheapest and Amazing Gadgets You Can Get in 2016
WORLD LIST
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this…
ELVENAR
Top 10 Oldest Trees in the World in 2016
TOP 10
If He Doesn’t Have These 20 Qualities, He’s Not Your Soul…
COMOS ENTERTAINMENT UPDATES
The Science of Healthy Aging: The World's Top…
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN
comments (122)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion.
Order by Newest
Threads Collapsed
1 2 3
sparafucile2
2m ago
1
2
Cook was the son of a landless labourer, and was given a good primary education by the parish vicar. After serving as the master of a collier, he voluntarily signed on before the mast in the RN, where his mathematical abilities were quickly recognised.
He has the remarkable record of being the first captain to circumnavigate the earth without losing any of his crew to scurvy. Many of the positions he determined were so accurate that they were not improved upon until the advent of Satnav.
Yet in the face of this, we still have a few Guardianistas banging the same old drum about colonialism and oppression, as though Europeans were uniquely wicked. They really ought to read Deirdre McCloskey: even the poorest countries are now immeasurably better off materially than they were before they had any contact with us. And whether Sarah likes it or not, that revolution started in NW Europe with the remarkable explosion of human inventiveness unleashed by the Reformation, the Commonwealth, and the Dutch invasion of 1688.
Reply
Report
Mark Hufton
3m ago
0
1
Gave up halfway through this. It's hard to read hand-wringing.
Reply
Report






View more comments
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
sport
football
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
opinion
› archaeology
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  