Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › culture › books art & design stage classical film tv & radio music games
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Science and nature
Book of the day
Pinpoint by Greg Milner review – how is GPS changing our world?
Anyone with a smartphone anywhere on Earth knows exactly where they are. But does that leave us lost?
We have all had the experience of getting lost while being informed of precisely where we are. Photograph: Alamy
Will Self
Wednesday 4 May 2016 07.30 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
66
Comments
58
Save for later
I
n early 2008, for quixotic reasons that needn’t detain us here, I decided to walk from Dubai airport across the city and into the Empty Quarter of Arabia. Prior to departure, at home in London, I tried to figure out a way of reaching, on foot, the desert resort of Bab al Shams, which lay about 15 miles beyond the city’s ragged fringe of buy-to-let building sites. There were some tourist maps that showed the downtown area and a few primary arterial routes, but there was nothing available that had both the necessary scale for a walker – 1:25,000 or better – and sufficiently accurate orientation to enable compass bearings. While the local Bedouin may to this day retain a mental map of the area, collating a myriad of little positional markers – environmental, solar and sidereal – in order to determine location and direction, everyone else presumably relied on the GPS navigation systems in their air-conditioned cars.
In the end I hit on the simple if deranging idea of laying a 12in ruler against a Google Earth satellite photograph of the desert on my computer screen. This did indeed give me a means of dead-reckoning, but I had no way of determining distance accurately, and when I left the last pile of dusty breezeblocks behind and headed into the dunes, following the flickering needle of my compass, it was with the understanding I might well be spending the night beneath the stars. In fact, the bearing proved sound enough, and I arrived at the resort hotel well after dark to be informed by the receptionist (who was from Selly Oak) that there’d be no alcohol served that night because it was the Prophet’s birthday.
It struck me then that my way-finding method was world-girdlingly ironic: when Wilfred Thesiger rode his camel this way in the late 1920s, he was the first person to undertake a systematic survey – before that, to the western eye at least, this Quarter was indeed a void. Now, less than a century later, the great sable expanse was once more sliding into a sort of zone of ignorance – a terra incognita defined not by our ignorance concerning its location or extent, but by the very technologies that allow us to traverse it with great accuracy and at speed. The first iPhone equipped with GPS tracking and mapping was also released in early 2008, so had I been a little less of a wannabe Bedouin, I could have gone equipped, and as long as I discovered shade to see what was on the screen, followed the little-blue-dot-that-was-me into the wide blue yonder.
My hypothetical iPhone would have also had to have sent signals to and received them from at least four of the GPS satellites currently in orbit around the Earth; these satellites are in communication with each other, and it is this spatio-temporal triangulation that enables anyone with a smartphone, more on less anywhere on Earth, to know where they are and where they are headed. There are now 32 satellites in orbit – the original plan was for 24 – and in the 35 very odd years since the system booted-up, their impact on more or less every aspect of our lives has been incalculable. We may associate GPS mostly with the warm tones giving us turn-by-turn driving directions, but the amount of critical infrastructure that now depends on the system means that were it to go down, civilisation as we know it would very likely collapse.
Greg Milner’s Pinpoint tells the story of how we were navigated into this situation − conventional methods of dating place us in the 2016th year of the Common Era, but for him the clock really began ticking (if oscillating caesium atoms do, in fact, tick) at midnight on 5 January 1980 when − synchronised to UTC (Coordinated Universal Time, as determined by an averaging of more than 200 atomic clocks worldwide) − the GPS system went live. But where did it come from, this notion of a network of satellites delineating a pure, mathematically definable and Cartesian space? Milner’s answer is unequivocal: “When an Isis terrorist gets a GPS reading, the process is enabled by the United States military, which presides over every GPS calculation.” In common with almost all of the amazing technological innovations that have characterised the past half-century, GPS owes its inception to the Pentagon’s strategic imperatives. The indiscriminate carpet-bombing of Japan and Germany in the second world war was seen to be inefficient as well as inhumane, and the drive in the years following was to create a targeting technology so accurate it could “put five bombs in the same hole”.
Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
Read more
There was this driver, and there was also a pressing need for a means of intercepting Soviet ballistic missiles, as well as ensuring the US’s missiles reached their targets. The first prototypes of GPS targeting systems were in use as early as the Vietnam war, but it was the Gulf war that really saw their wide-scale military adoption. The US defence department continues to oversee the system – maintenance costs about a billion a year – but day-to-day running is handled by the air force, while the 16 monitoring stations that ensure the satellite array does its job are under the control of the National Security Agency (NSA). Given, as Milner writes, that “GPS is an essential part of virtually every weapons system”, while the spooks have been involved with its development every precisely calibrated inch of the way, you don’t have to be a paranoid conspiracy theorist to feel concerned about our dependency on it.
Nor do you have to be a desert walker in order to apprehend the impact of GPS on your personal orientation and wayfinding: everyone reading this has probably had the experience of getting lost while, paradoxically, being informed of precisely where you are. GPS navigation seems to leech us of all the “thick data” of being in place – our sensory apprehensions, including visual, sonic and haptic cues − even as it gifts us such phenomenally accurate directions. Milner ventures a short way into the impact of the technology on our cognitive function, and even essays a few remarks on the philosophic conundrums it raises, but these issues are better dealt with in Nicholas Carr’s account of the risks of automation, The Glass Cage, whereas the bulk of this book is a fairly nerdy account of the backroom whiz-kids who figured out the nuts and bolts of the system.
I found Milner’s account of the infighting between Pentagon and its various contractors interesting enough, just as I enjoyed his dissection of the phenomenon of “death by GPS” (in, say, desert valleys, where drivers using a satnav get lost). Milner also delves deep into the dense web of intersections between GPS – “the world’s only free utility” – and all those other utilities we vitally depend on, with interesting side excursions into earthquake-detection and the GPS-assisted monitoring of offenders. But I cavilled at his view that “GPS reflects a choice, a conscious application of a neutral technology”.
Surely no technology is “neutral” – each bears the impress of the impetus for its development. Milner writes that: “GPS itself is a blank slate on to which we project our desires. And what we desire most from it is perfect knowledge of other people’s location and behaviour.” A benign view of this desire is Marshall McLuhan’s conception of “the global village”; a rather more negative one is Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon: a prison whose inmates are continuously surveilled by their jailers. A still more negative one is surely the truth: this was a technology developed in order to have perfect knowledge of other people’s location and behaviour, so that they could be killed, all the other stuff is simply a rather more useful spin-off.
Milner examines in some detail etak, the Polynesians’ traditional navigation method, which was supplanted by western systems – whether maps or GPS – that place the individual subject at their centre. Practitioners of etak relied on a combination of very thick perceptual data, and an intuitive grasp of the relational movement between two fixed points and a third moving one (a parallax view); and it was this that enabled their astonishing diaspora. That one of these fixed points might well be an island the navigator had never actually visited teases out the enormous conceptual gulf between our worldview and theirs: whether we are laying rulers across computer screens, checking the time on our phone or using that phone to make a call, we are employing a technology that, as Milner puts it, “provides the possibility of omniscience”. No wonder some of us develop the delusion that we are gods; a cosmic solecism no Polynesian – or Bedouin, for that matter – was ever guilty of.
• Pinpoint is published by WW Norton in the US and by Granta in the UK in July. To order a copy for £11.99 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
More reviews
Topics
Science and nature GPS Satellites Space
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
comments (58)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion.
Order by Newest
Threads Collapsed
1 2
Pugwash69
3h ago
0
1
It takes a good thirty seconds to Google 'how does a GPS work' but presumably this was too much effort for the author. GPS units do not send information to satellites for goodness sake.
Reply
Report
shellac
4h ago
0
1
And just thinking about the calculations needed to compensate for time dilation due to General AND Special relativity just makes my head hurt. Remarkable achievement.
Reply
Report




















View more comments
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
culture
› books
› science and nature
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  