Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
Advertisement
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › culture › classical film tv & radio music games books art & design stage
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Classical music
Florence Foster Jenkins: we may laugh, but to be this bad took talent
David Bowie was a fan of the ‘world’s worst singer’, but is the epithet a fair one?
Meryl Streep as Florence Foster Jenkins, music lover, heiress, and self-deceiver extraordinaire. Photograph: Photo Nick Wall, Pathe
Tom Service
Wednesday 4 May 2016 16.58 BST
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
0
Comments
0
Save for later
It was one of David Bowie’s favourite records. That may be as much of a recommendation as anyone needs, but Bowie’s fulsome appreciation of The Glory of the Human Voice, the deliciously ironic title for RCA’s release of Florence Foster Jenkins’s recordings, is itself a wonderful distillation of the Florence phenomenon: “She had and was blissfully unaware of, the worst set of pipes in the world of music … Be afraid, be very afraid”.
You’d have to be very brave or very stupid to go against Bowie’s opinions - thankfully, I’m both, and on the eve of Stephen Frears’ new film that celebrates her life, and the climactic 1944 performance at Carnegie Hall, it’s time for a little perspective on the Florence story.
Florence Foster Jenkins sings Adele’s Laughing Song” from Die Fledermaus
For a start, to make your public debut anywhere as a singer at the age of 76 is a terrifying prospect; to do it at Carnegie Hall, New York’s prestigious concert hall, requires astonishing reserves of self-confidence, and quite possibly, self-deception.
She might have been a truly terrible singer, but Florence Foster Jenkins was musically talented. There, I said it. As a child, she was touted as a piano prodigy, played her first public recital at the age of eight, and as “Little Miss Foster” performed at the White House for President Rutherford B. Hayes.
Her devotion to music led to her break from her family: her wealthy father refused to sanction further musical study, so she eloped with a much older man, who she married aged 17 or 18. The union was a disaster, not least because she contracted syphilis from her husband (treatment for the disease would make her completely bald in later life. As a newly single woman she supported herself by teaching piano but that career collapsed, however, after an arm injury meant she couldn’t play. It was only through her mother, and then, her father’s inheritance after his death in 1909, that Florence started her transformation into the grandiose grande dame of Manhattan society.
As St Clair Bayfield wrote (Bayfield became her common-law husband and manager), the essence of the Florence Foster Jenkins story was that she never knew what her singing voice was really like. Not because she couldn’t hear it, but because she lived as a legend in her own lifetime. Her annual vocal recitals resounded in a gilded echo chamber of praise, approbation, and acclaim for the brilliance of the Verdi Club’s President. It would have been social suicide in the echelons of Manhattan’s high society for any mere member to risk criticism of their patroness - and only a handful ever did.
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
‘A legend in her own lifetime.’ David Haig, Meryl Streep and Simon Helberg in Florence Foster Jenkins Photograph: Nick Wall/PR
After her recordings (which have never been out of print) appeared in the early 1940s, she would play her own performances of the Queen of the Night’s Act 2 aria from Mozart’s The Magic Flute to her friends alongside versions by genuinely glorious divas Luisa Tetrazzini and Frieda Hempel. Without saying which was which (and my goodness, you really can tell the difference...), she would ask her audience to write down which they preferred. As Donald Collup’s documentary on Florence, A World of Her Own reveals, only one person is known to have demurred from the opinion that hers was the best, and this bravely honest person was promptly castigated by Florence for her lack of taste.
Make no mistake: being this bad is hard.
That Queen of the Night recording is the unimpeachable, incomparable classic of the - alas - very small Foster Jenkins discography, with her accompanist, the joyously monikered Cosmé McMoon. But the notion that she couldn’t sing a single note in tune or in time is wide of the mark. True, most of her recordings are the right notes in the wrong place, but if you dare to listen to her other recordings, you will discover that Florence did have a very occasional relationship with musical accuracy, which of course only makes the effect of the whole more miraculously hilarious.
Watch the trailer for Stephen Frears’ film
But make no mistake: being this bad is hard. One of the reviews of the Carnegie Hall concert got it right. Robert Bagar in the New York World Telegram wrote: “Of all the singers appearing before the public today, only Mme. Jenkins has perfected the art of giving added zest to a written phrase by improvising it in quarter tones, either above or below the original notes. Think of the difficulties involved in making this possible”. Bagar was right. You try it: those exquisite shadings of pitch and frissons of out-of-tune vibrato are perfectly designed to induce the greatest possible injury to the piece, and to your ear-drums. And are almost impossible to replicate, because what makes them so magical in Florence’s performances is that you can hear that she is really trying for the right note, the right word, the right rhythm.
The truth of is, most of us are more like Florence than we are Tetrazzini, so perhaps we hear some echo of our common humanity in her vocal trials and tribulations. But Florence had something else too: a sheer joy in her performances. Here’s Bagar again: “She was exceedingly happy in her work. It is a pity that so few artists are, and the happiness was communicated, as if by magic to her hearers”. Florence had a heart attack days after the Carnegie Hall recital - perhaps induced by reading her reviews - and she died a month later. But that heroically misplaced happiness in her abilities still communicates today; indelibly, appallingly, magnificently. The “worst set of pipes in the world”? Perhaps not, after all...
•Florence Foster Jenkins is on general release from Thursday 5 May.
More blogposts
Topics
Classical music Florence Foster Jenkins
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
promoted linksfrom around the webRecommended by Outbrain
About this Content
Top 10 Cheapest and Awesome Gadgets You Can Get in 2016
LOVE AND MIND
10 Most Awesome Places in The World
TOP 10
10 Cheapest and Amazing Gadgets You Can Get in 2016
WORLD LIST
The most addictive game of the year! Play with 15…
FORGE OF EMPIRES
Gamers around the world have been waiting for this…
ELVENAR
Top 10 Oldest Trees in the World in 2016 | Love and Mind
LOVE AND MIND
See Inside Emily Blunt and John Krasinski's $8…
MANSION GLOBAL BY DOW JONES
Ikea's new chainless bike never rusts
FOX NEWS TECH
comments
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion.
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
sport
football
opinion
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
culture
› music
› classical music
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  