Support Guardian journalism and our coverage of critical, under-reported stories from around the world. Become a Supporter for just $49/€49 per year.
Find out more
Close
Skip to main content
sign in
search
more
International
The Guardian
home › football live scores tables competitions results fixtures clubs
UK
world
sport
selected
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
Football
The Knowledge
Have two European Cup winners played each other in the second tier?
Plus: clubs with the most train stations to capacity ratio, Ian Rush and the National Dairy Council, and more. Mail your questions to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU
Alan Rogers and Steve Stone, the last time Aston Villa and Nottingham Forest faced each other in the league. Photograph: Phil Cole/Allsport
Guardian sport
Wednesday 4 May 2016 10.30 BST
Last modified on Wednesday 4 May 2016
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Shares
88
Save for later
“Aston Villa will play Nottingham Forest in the Championship next season,” began Alan Sheridan last week. “Will it be the first time that two former European Cup-winning clubs have met in the second tier, in any European League, not just England?”
In answering these questions, sometimes the Knowledge does the heavy lifting. Sometimes we do some light lifting. Sometimes we supervise, standing by the sides with a cup of tea and point at things while someone else does the majority of the heavy lifting. This time, we’ve done no lifting at all. Over to the splendidly thorough Radu Ogrezeanu-Ghica for a pretty comprehensive answer to this one:
“If by ‘European Cup’ the Uefa Champions League, formerly known as the European Champion Clubs’ Cup, is meant, then yes, this will be the first time two former winners will meet in the second-tier domestic competition. There are only six countries with multiple past champions, which is obviously a necessary condition: England (five), Germany, Italy, Netherlands (three each), Spain and Portugal (two each). Out of these 18 clubs, the following spent time in the second-tier domestic competitions after their European Cup win: Manchester United (74-75), Aston Villa (87-88), Nottingham Forest (93-94, 97-98, and from 99-00 onward), Milan (80-81 and 82-83), and Juventus (06-07). As can be easily seen, they never met in the second tier.
Footballers sent off for taking their shirts off
Read more
“If however we look at the term ‘European cup’ in a larger sense, to include all European club competitions (ie also the Cup Winners’ Cup, the Europa League / Uefa Cup / Inter-Cities Fairs Cup) the group becomes much larger. Countries with multiple champions are: England (13), Italy (nine), Germany (eight + one from GDR), Spain (six), Netherlands, Portugal, Scotland (three each), Belgium, France, Russia, Ukraine (two each). The Soviet Union and Yugoslavia also used to have two European Cup winners, who however meanwhile are in separate countries (Ukraine / Georgia, and Serbia / Croatia respectively). The list of former winners who, after their European Cup win, spent time in lower leagues, chronologically, by country looks as follows:
England: Manchester United (74-75), Chelsea (75-76, 76-77, 79-80 until 83-84, and 88-89), Tottenham Hotspur (77-78), Newcastle United (78-79 until 83-84, 89-90 until 92-93, and 09-10), West Ham United (78-79 until 80-81, 89-91, 92-93, 03-05, and 11-12), Leeds United (82-83 until 89-90 and from 04-05 onward), Manchester City (83-85, 87-89, 97-00, and 01-02), Ipswich Town (86-87 until 91-92, 95-96 until 99-00, and 02-03 onward), Aston Villa (87-88), Nottingham Forest (93-94, 97-98, and form 99-00 onward).
Italy: Milan (80-81 and 82-83), Fiorentina (93-94, 02-04), Napoli (98-00, and 01-02 until 06-07), Sampdoria (99-00 until 02-03 and 11-12), Juventus (06-07), Parma (08-09).
Germany: Borussia Dortmund (72-73 until 75-76), 1 FC Magdeburg (from 91-92 onward), Eintracht Frankfurt (96-98, 01-03, 04-05, and 11-12), Borussia Mönchengladbach (99-01, and 07-08).
Spain: Real Zaragoza (71-72, 77-78, 02-03, 08-09, and from 13-14 onward), Valencia (86-87), Atlético Madrid (00-02).
Scotland: Rangers (12-13 until 15-16).
Belgium: KV Mechelen (97-99, 01-02, 03-07).
France: Marseille (94-96).
“As can be seen from the list above, these teams have met in lower leagues quite a lot in England, for the first time in 1978-79 when Newcastle United and West Ham United had been demoted together. In fact since the 74-75 season there has, with the exception of the 94-95 season, always been a former European Cup winner in the English second tier (or below). Outside England it has happened only in Italy where Napoli played in Serie B against Sampdoria (in 99-00, 01-02 and 02-03), against Fiorentina (in 03-04) and against Juventus (in 06-07). In Germany it has not happened yet, as 1 FC Magdeburg has been in lower leagues than the other former winners ever since 1991.”
Step right up, step right up …
“In timely celebration of Leicester’s finest outputs, has any professional footballer been the face of a product longer than Gary Lineker’s 21 years advertising Walkers?” ponders Rich Booth.
Actually yes. Sort of.
“I was at BMP when we made the original Lineker commercial (called Welcome Home),” writes advertising insider Richard Morris. “A few years earlier (1989) we’d made the ‘Wake up to Milk’ campaign for the National Dairy Council featuring this Ian Rush ad which became known as ‘Accrington Stanley’. I was told at the time that the original script said ‘Ian Rush says if I don’t drink milk I’ll only be good enough to play for Everton’; but Everton said no, followed by a no from every (first division) club approached. Accrington Stanley was then picked because at the time the club no longer existed. 25 years on, and Ian Rush is still helping out both milk and Accrington Stanley – as this story ably demonstrates …
“The agency didn’t just use footballers in its ads. It was also responsible for this wonderful ad. Goodness knows how the team got Muhammed Ali to agree to advertise Unigate Dairies.”
Train stations v town size
“Burnley are served by three stations: Burnley Barracks, Burnley Central and Burnley Manchester Road,” wrote James Blanchard in a spin-off question last week. “The Rose Grove station is also just within the town limits. Is this ratio of population/supporters against rail stations a record for a football club?”
“I think Maidstone beats Burnley for the most train stations per supporter,” confidently begins Graeme Harvey. “Maidstone United has a ground capacity of 3,063, and also three train stations - Maidstone East, Maidstone West, and The Barracks.”
“I’d say Portsmouth has a minimum of four but a maximum of 10 if you’re including all the boroughs as part of the city limits,” suggests Barney Hague-Wright. “The definite train stations would be Portsmouth Harbour, Portsmouth and Southsea, Fratton, and Hilsea.”
Who was the first footballer to be worth their weight in gold?
Read more
“My local team Greenock Morton would take some beating,” posits Stephen O’Donnell. “The stadium, Cappielow Park, is served by both Cartsdyke and Bogston rail stations, with a further seven rail stations (Greenock Central; Greenock West; Fort Matilda; Whinhill; Drumfrochar; Branchton; I. B. M.) located within the town limits of Greenock (population 45,000). The town has almost as many rail stations as Edinburgh: a legacy of Greenock’s importance as a commercial port and shipbuilding hub.
“The chief rail line also runs immediately behind the main stand at Cappielow. Train drivers sometimes slow down to give passengers a passing view of a match in progress - while the agricultural clearances favoured by lower league Scottish defenders pose a regular hazard to any passing service.”
Finally, Amir Arezoo writes: “I think Doncaster has a good shout. The Keepmoat holds about 15,000 and Doncaster has nine stations in the ‘metropolitan borough’: Adwick, Bentley, Conisborough, Doncaster, Hatfield, Kirk Sandall, Mexborough, Thorne North and Thorne South. That’s about 1,666 supporters per station...”
And the we have a spin-off question to the spin-off question, from Chris Parrott: “Watford has 10 stations within a two-mile radius of the ground. Watford North, Watford Junction, Watford High Street, Watford (Metropolitan Line), Watford Vicarage Road (to open), Cassiobridge (to open), Bushey, Croxley Green, Carpenters Park and Moor Park. “Does any club (outside London) have more?”
Knowledge archive
“Has anyone ever been sent off for fouling his own team-mate?” asked Peter Christensen back in 2004.
The Knowledge’s inbox was jam-packed with your tales of team-mates turning nasty, including a particularly nasty scrap in 1979 between Derek “Killer” Hales and fellow Charlton striker Mike Flanagan. The pair hadn’t been on speaking terms for some time and when they found themselves trailing 2-0 to lowly Maidstone in an FA Cup third-round tie, it all kicked off. The pair set into each other like agitated badgers, and were promptly dismissed - Hales even found himself the proud new owner of a P45 shortly afterwards.
Things almost got that bad for Craig Levein 15 years later, when he and Hearts team-mate Graeme Hogg came to blows in the bubbling cauldron of tension that is... a pre-season friendly against Raith Rovers. In full view of the handily placed TV cameras, the pair (literally) pulled no punches in their discussion of the goal conceded moments before. Both were red-carded as Hogg was stretchered off, and Levein was made to sit out 12 games and hand over two weeks’ wages by the club.
Aalborg v Brondby: the match that lasted six months and five days
Read more
In 1995, Premiership champions Blackburn headed into their fifth Champions League group game against Spartak Moscow with the unenviable record of one goal and one point. And on the night, people barely had time to draw breath (let alone utter the words ‘not’ ‘really’ and ‘up to this gig’) before there was fighting in the Blackburn ranks.
No surprise that David Batty was involved, but in fact it was Graeme Le Saux who rained in with the punches after the pair collided going for the same ball. Amazingly neither player was given his marching orders - though Colin Hendry was later red-carded, despite making a valiant attempt to withdraw from the offending tackle.
Our most recent example, meanwhile, comes from Arsenal keeper Jens Lehmann. In his final season with Borussia Dortmund, Lehmann was sent-off four times - the most notable for running at full pelt into the midfield to confront Marcio Amoroso over his slack defending. Some hands-round-the-neck action and a hefty shove later, Lehmann was making his way to the showers, his mood no doubt improved by the Schalke goal (which had started it all) being disallowed for offside.
For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the Knowledge archive.
Can you help?
“In the wake of Leicester’s win, I was looking at Jamie Vardy’s honours list on Wikipedia and note he’s now got wins at levels 1, 2, 5 and 7 of the English pyramid, and all in the last five years to boot,” notes Liam McGuigan. “Is this the biggest difference in levels between league titles for any player, within the official league system?”
“In 1913 and 1914, Fram Reykjavík won the Icelandic championship by being the only team to register for the league,” recalls Kári Tulinius. “The two other teams that competed in the inaugural competition in 1912 declined to enter. Have any other national titles been won by default?”
“Arsenal had two points deducted in the 1990-91 season but still won the First Division,” begins Scott Sumner. “Portsmouth had nine points deducted in the 2009–10 Premier League season but would have been relegated regardless. Have there been many instances where crucial final positions have been decided by deductions? The only one I can think of is Middlesbrough being relegated in 1996-97.”
“My team, Farnborough, have recently finished 18th in the Ryman Premier Division in a 24-team division,” says David Ellicott. “We dropped into the relegation zone after our second game, and only moved back out of the relegation zone after our penultimate game (our 45th game). Has any team spent more time in the relegation zone in a season and finished outside the relegation zone?”
“With Leicester having achieved Premier League glory it struck me that all of Gary Lineker’s clubs will have won their national titles without him,” writes Jez Orbell. “Everton, Barcelona, Tottenham, plus Grampus 8 in Japan, have all come out on top at one time or another but he hasn’t. You can even count England if you include the World Cup. Has any other player been in the right place at the wrong time more often?”
“On a recent episode of the BBC 5 live World Football Phone In a question regarding purple home shirts in football was raised,” muses Daniel Truninger. “While it isn’t a common kit colour the likes of Fiorentina, Valladolid and Austria Salzburg were mentioned as famous teams playing in purple. As I am currently working with an Austria Vienna supporter I realised that at least two teams called Austria wear purple. After a quick Wikipedia research I found that Austria Klagenfurt also turn out in the same colour. Is there a theme which links their colour choice? It appears that calling a club “Austria” isn’t the link since SC Austria Lustenau turn out in green.”
Send your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or get in touch via Twitter @TheKnowledge_GU
Share on Pinterest
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Google+
Save for later
popular
The Guardian
back to top
home
UK
world
sport
selected
opinion
culture
business
lifestyle
fashion
environment
tech
travel
all
football
facebook
twitter
all topics
all contributors
solve technical issue
complaints & corrections
terms & conditions
privacy policy
cookie policy
securedrop
© 2016 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
  